# Natural Rights and Positivism -- Leo Strauss

In the last video, I discussed the relationship between historicism and
natural right according to Leo Strauss. And showed the fruits that this
relationship bears. However, I have not yet discussed the relationship
between natural right and Positivism -- another equally powerful enemy
of natural right alongside Historicism.

In the last video, I have already defined the concept of a natural right
and I will not go into this anymore. Here I am only going to reiterate
the formulation offered by Strauss: "natural right claims to be a right
that is discernible by human reason and is universally acknowledged"
(Strauss, 1971, p. 9). Unlike historicism, which merely challenges
natural rights universality, positivism singlehandedly denies any form
of natural right considering it as something unscientific. This is
because positivism assumes that conflict between different values or
value systems is essentially insoluble for human reason. This is most
evident in Max Weber's work, which, according to Strauss, is the
greatest representative of social science positivism. Considering
procedures and methodology of natural sciences as its standard,
positivist social sciences presumably banish any form of unempirical
claims out of its field of expertise, especially - value judgments. Or
as Strauss puts it, "the belief of positivism that value judgments are
not subject to rational control, encourages inclination to make
irresponsible assertions regarding right and wrong, good and bad"
(Strauss, 1988, p. 23). Thus, in order to preserve its scientific
status, social science aspires to make itself totally value-free or
value-neutral.

This leads us to the core of positivism, namely, to the division or
distinction between Facts and values. The social scientist claiming to
be scientific i.e. positivist draws a sharp line between values and
facts, regarding himself as unable to pass any value judgments (Strauss,
1991). Again, to borrow Weber's position, social science can only answer
questions of facts and their causes, but it is not competent to answer
questions of value. Because, as Strauss remarks, "the absolute
heterogeneity of facts and values necessitates the ethically neutral
character of social science" (Strauss, 1971, p. 40). Because in the case
of this absolute heterogeneity "no conclusion can be drawn from any fact
as to its valuable character, nor can we infer the factual character of
something from its being valuable or desirable" (Strauss, 1971, p. 39).
It is another question whether such restriction (expectations) is
realistic for social sciences?

This ethical neutrality of positivist social sciences results in total
abandonment of Natural Rights. Presumably, it is considered as yet
another value judgment on which social science cannot rely upon.
Therefore, any right, according to positivism, is merely a positive
right. This means that what is right is determined exclusively by the
legislators and the courts of the various countries (Strauss, 1971). But
none of the scientists, who hold this view, acknowledge the disastrous
conclusions to, which their position leads. If all right is only a
positive right this means that there is no transcultural and
trans-historical standard, an ideal that is universal. But, instead, all
societies have their own ideals and each is of equal value. Hence, if
any principle is sufficiently justified by the fact that it is accepted
by society, the principles of cannibalism are as defensible or sound as
those of civilized life (Strauss, 1971). Or as Strauss puts it:

> "Therefore, our believing in certain values cannot be traced beyond
> our decision or commitment. One might even say that, to the extent to
> which we are still able to reflect on the relation of our values to
> our situation, we are still trying to shirk the responsibility for our
> choice" (Strauss, 1991, p. 10).

In other words, there is no reasonable way to demonstrate the
superiority of one value over another. We can merely persuade or
indoctrinate people into preferring one value over another. However, at
the end of the day, it is nothing but propaganda. Hence Isaiah Berlin
remarks:

> "To realize the relative validity of one\'s convictions and yet stand
> for them unflinchingly, is what distinguishes a civilized man from a
> barbarian" (Berlin, 1958, p. 51).

When there persists no universal value discernible by human reason, the
single choice we are left with is to embrace the relative validity of
our values. In short, rejection of natural right (or of value judgments
in general) eventually leads to moral relativism.

However, here we ought to reiterate the aforementioned question: how
realistic it is for social science to be faithful to its positivist
ideal i.e. to reject any value judgment and limit itself to facts only?
Strauss demonstrates four major considerations, which speak decisively
about the theoretical weaknesses of social science positivism:

1.  "It is impossible to study social phenomena i.e. all important
    social phenomena, without making value judgments... Because,
    generally speaking, it is impossible to understand thought or action
    without evaluating it" (Strauss, 1988, p. 21). Besides this, as
    Strauss ads, one must not overlook the invisible value judgments
    that are necessarily presupposed by any social scientist; value
    judgments of significant importance, yet often concealed from
    undiscerning eyes. For example, a fundamental distinction between
    \"ethos" and \"techniques of living (or \"prudential" rules). Any
    sociologist must recognize and appreciate a distinctive character of
    an ethos (he is studying). But such appreciation necessarily implies
    a value judgment. The same may be said of morality, religion,
    politics, art, civilization, etc.

2.  As we have already mentioned, "the rejection of value judgments is
    based on assumption that the conflict between different values or
    value-systems is essentially insoluble for human reason. But this
    assumption, while generally taken to be sufficiently established,
    has never been proven" (Strauss, 1988, p. 22).

3.  Another reason, why positivists look down on value judgments, is
    their belief that scientific knowledge is the highest form of human
    knowledge. Because of this, they depreciate pre-scientific, common
    sense knowledge. However, this superstitious distrust towards
    pre-scientific knowledge fosters all sorts of sterile investigations
    or complicated idiocies. Futile discussions that eventually lead to
    nowhere. This is because any study in social science presupposes
    knowledge about basic common sense distinctions. "To illustrate this
    by the simplest example: all studies in social science presuppose
    that its devotees can tell human beings from other beings". And
    everyone can agree that this fundamental knowledge was not acquired
    by them in classrooms; moreover "this knowledge is not transformed
    by social science into scientific knowledge, but retains its initial
    status without any modification throughout" (Strauss, 1988, p. 23).
    In other words, it never ascends from the status of pre-scientific
    knowledge to the status of scientific knowledge.

4.  And finally, Positivism necessarily transforms itself into
    historicism. By virtue of its orientation by the model of natural
    science, social science is in danger of mistaking peculiarities of,
    say, mid-twentieth century United States, or more generally of
    modern Western society, for the essential character of human
    society. To avoid this danger, it is compelled to engage in
    \"cross-cultural research,\" in the study of other cultures, both
    present and past. But in making this effort, it misses the meaning
    of those other cultures, because it interprets them through a
    conceptual scheme which originates in modern Western society, which
    reflects that particular society, and which fits at best only that
    particular society" (Strauss, 1988, p. 25).

Presumably, if one takes into consideration these theoretical problems,
it becomes hard to accept positivism as a viable option for social
sciences. Even though it is still very popular among western academics.
But as Strauss remarks, although â€žPositivism may be said to be more
dogmatic than any other position of which we have records... It is able
to present itself as very skeptical; it is that manifestation of
dogmatism based on skepticism in which the skepticism completely
conceals the dogmatism from its adherents" (Strauss, 1995, p. 26). It is
precisely thanks to this veil of skepticism that positivism is still
considered by many as the most reasonable and scientifically accurate
viewpoint.
